Any method for RNA secondary structure prediction is determined by four ingredients. The "architecture" is the choice of features implemented by the model (such as stacked basepairs, loop length distributions, etc.). The architecture determines the number of parameters in the model. The "scoring scheme" is the nature of those parameters (whether thermodynamic, probabilistic or weights).  The "parameterization" stands for the specific values assigned to the parameters. These three ingredients are referred to as ``the model''. The fourth ingredient is the "folding algorithms" used to predict plausible secondary structures given the model and the sequence of a structural RNA.
In order study the interplay of all four different ingredients at a leveled ground and to explore a range of probabilistic models of increasing complexity, and to directly compare probabilistic, thermodynamic, and discriminative approaches, we created TORNADO, a computational tool that can parse a wide spectrum of RNA grammar architectures (including the standard nearest-neighbor model and more) using a generalized super-grammar that can be parameterized with probabilities, energies, or arbitrary scores.
In this seminar, using TORNADO I will make several unifying observations drawn from looking at more than forty years of methods for RNA secondary structure prediction in the light of this classification.
The observations are: (1) Any architecture for RNA secondary structure can be described in the form of a grammar in the Chomsky sense.  (2) Although historically it was believed that probabilistic scoring schemes could not be used for architectures with thousands of parameters, it has been shown that architectures of arbitrary complexity can be paired with all three scoring systems. (3) While the parameterization methods are specific for each scoring scheme, the folding algorithms are essentially identical for all scoring types.  (4) For all architectures tested, folding algorithms that take into account the whole ensemble of possible structures outperform simpler ``best structure'' algorithms. This result holds true across all different scoring schemes. (5) For complex architectures, models using either trained probabilities or trained weights predict RNA secondary structures with higher accuracy than methods based solely on thermodynamic parameters.  (6) Proper training and testing of methods for RNA secondary structure prediction with large numbers of parameters require using test set with different structures (not just with different sequences) from the training sets. The current datasets of structural RNAs lack sufficient structural diversity for a proper parameterization and testing of these complex methods.
Finally, there seems to be a performance ceiling that affects all methods with complex architectures, ceiling that impacts all scoring schemes with remarkable similarity. This suggests that modeling RNA secondary structure by using intrinsic sequence-based plausible ``foldability'' will require the incorporation of other forms of information in order to constraint the folding space and to improve prediction accuracy. This could give an advantage to probabilistic scoring systems since a probabilistic framework is a natural platform to incorporate different sources of information into one single inference problem.
